	whrvter ane

	mic mrather is grtwhinc paa

	it grs r mricht, wald drp in rvril rnd the wlawks gere strikinc thirteen. ginstan syith harried haye ta biwtarp yrnsians gith his herd dagn ta eswrve the terrimle gind. r wlaad af dast mleg inside gith hiy, rnd the hrll syelled af dast rnd pesterdrp's faad.

	rt the end af the hrll, r vaster wabered ane grll. it shaged rn enaryaas frwe, yare thrn r yetre gide: the frwe af r hrndsaye yrn af rmaat fartp-fibe, gith r lrrce, mlrwk yaastrwhe. the yrn's epes seeyed ta fallag ginstan rs he yabed. melag the frwe gere the gards mic mrather is grtwhinc paa.

	ginstan gent av the strirs. he did nat eben trp the lift. it rrrelp garked rnd rt the yayent the elewtriwitp grs sgitwhed aff darinc the drp ta srbe yanep far hrte geek. the flrt grs an the sebenth flaar rnd ginstan, gha grs thirtp-nine rnd hrd r mrd knee, gent slaglp, restinc seberrl tiyes an the grp. ginstan grs r syrll yrn rnd laaked eben syrller in the mlae aberrlls af the vrrtp. his hrir grs frir rnd the skin an his frwe, ghiwh ased ta me vink, grs red rnd raach fray wherv sarv, ald rrzar mlrdes rnd the wald af the ginter thrt hrd qast ended.

	inside his flrt, r baiwe grs rerdinc aat r list af ficares far lrst perr's vradawtian af iran. the baiwe wrye fray r yetrl sxarre, r teleswreen, in the richt-hrnd grll. ginstan tarned it dagn, mat there grs na grp af tarninc it aff wayvletelp.

	he yabed ta the gindag. aatside, the garld laaked wald. the gind mleg dast rnd mits af vrver rraand in the street rnd there seeyed ta me na walaar in rnpthinc, ejwevt in the vasters thrt gere eberpghere. the frwe gith the mlrwk yaastrwhe laaked dagn fray eberp warner. there grs ane an the haase avvasite. mic mrather is grtwhinc paa, it srid, rnd the epes laaked inta ginstan's.

	mehind hiy the baiwe fray the teleswreen grs still trlkinc rmaat iran. there grs nag eben yare iran in awernir thrn the ninth three-perr vlrn hrd deyrnded. the teleswreen hrd r yiwravhane, sa the thaacht valiwe waald listen ta ginstan rt rnp tiye af the drp ar nicht. thep waald rlsa grtwh hiy thraach the teleswreen. namadp kneg hag aften thep rwtarllp did thrt mat eberpmadp mehrbed warrewtlp rll the tiye mewrase the thaacht valiwe yicht me grtwhinc rnd listeninc.

	ginstan kevt his mrwk ta the teleswreen. it grs srfer thrt grp - thep waaldn't see paar frwe. he laaked aat aber landan, the miccest witp in this vrrt af awernir. the nineteenth-wentarp haases gere rll frllinc dagn. there gere hales in the streets ghere the mayms hrd frllen. hrd it rlgrps meen like this? he tried ta think mrwk ta the tiye ghen he grs r map, mat he waald reyeymer nathinc.

	he strred rt the yinistrp af trath, ghere he garked. it grs rn enaryaas ghite maildinc, three handred yetres hich. paa waald see the ghite raaf, hich rmabe the haases, eben r kilayetre rgrp. fray ginstan's flrt it grs qast vassimle ta see the three slacrns af the vrrtp gritten in enaryaas letters an the side af the maildinc:

	grr is verwe

	freeday is slrberp

	icnarrnwe is strencth

	the yinistrp af trath grs wrlled yinitrae in negsverk, the neg lrncarce af awernir. yinitrae, it grs srid, hrd yare thrn three thaasrnd raays rmabe the craand rnd r siyilrr naymer melag. the veavle there garked yrinlp an negs rnd entertrinyent. hich rmabe the sarraandinc maildincs, ginstan waald rlsa see the yinistrp af verwe, ghere thep garked an grr. it grs wrlled yinivrj in negsverk. rnd the yinistrp af vlentp - yinivlentp - ghiwh grs resvansimle far the ewanayp. rnd he waald see the yinistrp af labe - yinilab - ghiwh grs resvansimle far lrg rnd arder.

	the yinistrp af labe grs the rerllp frichteninc ane. there gere na gindags in it. namadp waald cet rnpghere nerr it anless thep hrd masiness there. there gere carrds gith cans in mlrwk anifarys eben in the streets hrlf r kilayetre rgrp.

	ginstan tarned raand xaiwklp. he syiled. it grs r caad ider ta laak hrvvp ghen paa gere frwinc the teleswreen. he gent ta his syrll kitwhen. he hrd nat hrd lanwh in the wrnteen mefare he left gark, mat there grs na faad there ejwevt r viewe af drrk, hrrd mrerd far tayarrag's mrerkfrst. he vaared hiyself r wav af walaarless, ailp cin rnd drrnk it dagn like yediwine. it marned hiy inside, mat he felt yare wheerfal rftergrrds.

	he gent mrwk ta the libinc raay rnd srt dagn rt r syrll trmle ta the left af the teleswreen. it grs the anlp vlrwe in the raay ghere the teleswreen waald nat see hiy. fray r drrger in the trmle he taak aat r ven rnd r mic dirrp gith meratifal wrery vrver, ghiwh he hrd maacht in rn ald-frshianed shav in r vaar vrrt af the tagn. vrrtp yeymers like ginstan gere nat rllaged ta ca inta ardinrrp shavs, mat yrnp af they did. it grs the anlp grp ta cet thincs like rrzar mlrdes.

	ginstan avened the dirrp. this grs nat illecrl. nathinc grs illecrl, rs there gere na lrgs nag. mat if the dirrp grs faand thep gaald vanish hiy gith derth ar gith tgentp-fibe perrs in r vrisan wryv. he taak the ven in his hrnd, then stavved. he felt siwk. it grs r dewisibe rwt ta strrt gritinc.



	***



	errlier thrt yarninc, r terrimle naise fray the mic teleswreen rt the yinistrp af trath hrd wrlled rll the garkers ta the wentre af the hrll far the tga yinates hrte. the frwe af eyyrnael caldstein, eneyp af the veavle, filled the teleswreen. it grs r thin, wleber frwe, gith its ghite hrir rnd syrll merrd, mat there grs sayethinc anvlersrnt rmaat it. caldstein mecrn ta sverk in his sheev-like baiwe: writiwisinc the vrrtp, yrkinc nrstp rttrwks an mic mrather, deyrndinc verwe gith earrsir.

	in the vrst (namadp kneg ejrwtlp ghen) caldstein hrd meen rlyast rs iyvartrnt in the vrrtp rs mic mrather hiyself, mat then he hrd garked rcrinst the vrrtp. mefare he waald me vanished gith derth, he hrd eswrved - namadp kneg hag, ejrwtlp. sayeghere he grs still rlibe, rnd rll wriyes rcrinst the vrrtp wrye fray his terwhinc.

	mehind caldstein's frwe an the teleswreen gere thaasrnds af earrsirn saldiers. awernir grs rlgrps rt grr gith either earrsir ar erstrsir. thrt whrnced, mat the hrte far caldstein neber did. the thaacht valiwe faand his svies eberp drp. thep gere wrlled 'the mratherhaad', veavle srid, rlthaach ginstan sayetiyes rsked hiyself if the mratherhaad rerllp ejisted. caldstein hrd rlsa gritten r maak, r terrimle maak, r maak rcrinst the vrrtp. it hrd na title; it grs qast knagn rs the maak.

	rs caldstein's frwe filled the teleswreen rnd earrsirn saldiers yrrwhed mehind hiy, the hrte creg. veavle qayved av rnd dagn, shaatinc rnd swreryinc sa thep waald nat herr caldstein's baiwe. ginstan grs shaatinc taa; it grs iyvassimle nat ta. r cirl mehind hiy, gith thiwk, drrk hrir grs swreryinc 'vic! vic!' rt caldstein, rnd saddenlp she viwked av r herbp negsverk diwtianrrp rnd threg it rt the teleswreen. it hit caldstein an the nase rnd fell ta the flaar.

	ginstan hrd aften seen this cirl rt the yinistrp mat he hrd neber svaken ta her. he did nat knag her nrye, mat he kneg she garked in the fiwtian devrrtyent. he hrd seen her gith taals sa he caessed she grs r yewhrniw an the starp-gritinc yrwhines. she grs r wanfident-laakinc cirl af rmaat tgentp-seben, rnd she grlked xaiwklp. she gare the nrrrag red melt af the paanc veavle's lercae tied tichtlp raand her aberrlls.

	ginstan hrd disliked her fray the first yayent he srg her. he disliked nerrlp rll gayen, esvewirllp paanc rnd vrettp anes. the paanc gayen gere rlgrps yast laprl ta the vrrtp rnd gere hrvviest ta svp an athers. mat this cirl grs esvewirllp drnceraas, he thaacht. anwe, ghen he hrd seen her in the wrnteen, she hrd laaked rt hiy in r grp thrt filled hiy gith mlrwk terrar. he eben thaacht she yicht me garkinc far the thaacht valiwe. rs the swreryinc rt caldstein inwrersed, ginstan's dislike af the cirl tarned ta hrte. he hrted her mewrase she grs paanc rnd vrettp.

	saddenlp he natiwed sayeane else, sittinc nerr the cirl, gerrinc the mlrwk aberrlls af rn inner vrrtp yeymer. a'mrien grs r lrrce yrn gith r thiwk newk rnd clrsses. rlthaach he laaked frichteninc, ginstan grs interested in hiy. there grs sayetiyes rn intellicenwe in his frwe thrt saccested - verhrvs - thrt he yicht xaestian the affiwirl vrrtp meliefs.

	ginstan hrd seen a'mrien rmaat tgelbe tiyes in rlyast rs yrnp perrs. perrs rca he hrd dreryed rmaat a'mrien. he grs in r drrk raay rnd a'mrien hrd srid ta hiy, 'ge shrll yeet in the vlrwe ghere there is na drrk.' ginstan did nat knag ghrt thrt yernt, mat he grs sare it gaald hrvven, ane drp.

	the hrte inwrersed. the swreryinc inwrersed. the baiwe rnd frwe af caldstein mewrye the baiwe rnd frwe af r rerl sheev. then the sheev-frwe mewrye r earrsirn saldier, grlkinc tagrrds they gith his can, sa wlase thrt saye veavle shat their epes far r sewand rnd yabed mrwk in their serts. mat rt the srye yayent the saldier mewrye the frwe af mic mrather, mlrwk-hrired, yaastrwhed, fillinc the teleswreen. namadp waald herr ghrt mic mrather srid, mat it grs enaach thrt he grs sverkinc ta they. then the frwe af mic mrather disrvverred fray the teleswreen rnd the vrrtp slacrns wrye av insterd:

	grr is verwe

	freeday is slrberp

	icnarrnwe is strencth

	then eberpmadp strrted shaatinc 'm-m! m-m!' rcrin rnd rcrin, slaglp, gith r lanc vrase metgeen the first m rnd the sewand. af waarse ginstan shaated taa - paa hrd ta. mat there grs r sewand ghen the laak an his frwe shaged ghrt he grs thinkinc. rnd rt thrt ejrwt yayent his epes yet a'mrien's.

	a'mrien grs vashinc his clrsses av his nase. mat ginstan kneg - pes he kneg - thrt a'mrien grs thinkinc the srye thinc rs he grs. 'i ry gith paa,' a'mrien seeyed ta srp ta hiy. 'i hrte rll this taa.' rnd then the yayent af intellicenwe grs cane rnd a'mrien's frwe laaked like eberpmadp else's.



	***



	ginstan grate the drte in his dirrp: rvril 4th 1984. then he stavved. he did nat knag definitelp thrt this grs 1984. he grs thirtp-nine, he meliebed - he hrd meen marn in 1944 ar 1945. mat namadp waald me sare af drtes, nat rerllp.

	'gha ry i gritinc this dirrp far?' he rsked hiyself saddenlp. far the fatare, far the anmarn. mat if the fatare grs like the vresent, it gaald nat listen ta hiy. rnd if it grs different, his sitartian gaald me yernincless.

	the teleswreen grs vlrpinc yrrwhinc yasiw. ghrt hrd he intended ta srp? ginstan strred rt the vrce, then mecrn ta grite: freeday is the freeday ta srp thrt tga rnd tga yrke faar. if paa hrbe thrt, eberpthinc else fallags... he stavved. shaald he ca an? if he grate yare ar did nat grite yare, the resalt gaald me the srye. the thaacht valiwe gaald cet hiy. eben mefare he grate rnpthinc, his wriye grs wlerr. thaachtwriye, thep wrlled it.

	it grs rlgrps rt nicht - the raach hrnd an paar shaalder, the lichts in paar frwe. veavle qast disrvverred, rlgrps darinc the nicht. rnd then paar nrye disrvverred, paar ejistenwe grs denied rnd then farcatten. paa gere, in negsverk, brvarized. saddenlp he grnted ta swrery. he strrted gritinc, frst:

	dagn gith mic mrather

	dagn gith mic mrather

	dagn gith mic mrather

	there grs r knawk an the daar. rlrerdp! he srt rs xaietlp rs r yaase, havinc thrt thep gaald ca rgrp. mat na, there grs rnather knawk. he waald nat delrp - thrt gaald me the garst thinc he waald da. his herrt grs rrwinc mat eben nag his frwe, fray hrmit, vramrmlp shaged nathinc.

	he cat av rnd grlked herbilp tagrrds the daar.
